docs: Documented front-end observability runtime configuration (#2313)
vaadin/docs: articles/tools/observability/configuration.asciidoc

----
otel.instrumentation.${instrumentationName}.enabled=true
----

== Frontend Observability Configuration

> Frontend observability is enabled by default, with all the client side instrumentation active.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Frontend observability is enabled by default, with all the client-side instrumentation active.
```

The configuration can be tuned in two ways: 

* statically, by editing the [filename]`agent.properties` or by providing environment variables or system properties

> * dynamically, implementing [interfacename]`ObservabilityClientConfigurer` that applies changes at runtime.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Dynamically, implementing the [interfacename]`ObservabilityClientConfigurer` interface that applies changes at runtime.
```

> With the static configuration the same settings are applied to all UI instances and to change the configuration a server restart is required.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With static configuration the same settings are applied to all UI instances. Changes to the configuration require a server restart.
```

> With dynamic configuration, you can enable or disable the instrumentation at runtime, without restarting the server, and tune it for a specific browser tab. Changes are applied when the browser page is reloaded.

Reviewer: I wonder why you wanted to change from active to passive voice in the first sentence? Is it weird to say “you” when it’s the software enabling/disabling the instrumentation based on the configuration?

Splitting it into two standalone sentences is good, though 👍

> Opposite, with dynamic configuration the instrumentation can be enabled or disabled at runtime, without restarting the server, and can be tuned for a specific browser tab. Changes are applied when the browser page is reloaded.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With dynamic configuration, you can enable or disable the instrumentation at runtime, without restarting the server, and tune it for a specific browser tab. Changes are applied when the browser page is reloaded.
```

=== Frontend Observability Static Configuration

Static frontend observability configuration can be provided by adding entries to the [filename]`agent.properties` file or with environment variables or system properties, as mentioned earlier.

> The following properties can be used to tune frontend instrumentation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following properties can be used to tune frontend instrumentation:
```

|`otel.instrumentation.vaadin.frontend.long-task`
|Enables or disables the Long Task instrumentation.
|`true`

|`otel.instrumentation.vaadin.frontend.frontend-error`
|Enables or disables the Frontend Error instrumentation.
|`true`

|===

For more information about the frontend instrumentation, consult the <<./reference#,Observability Kit Reference>> page.

=== Frontend Observability Runtime Configuration

By default, frontend observability enables all out-of-the-box client-side instrumentation.
Observability Kit provides a way to programmatically enable, disable and tune the instrumentation at runtime.

This is done by implementing the [interfacename]`ObservabilityClientConfigurer` interface and applying the desired settings to the [interfacename]`ObservabilityClientConfiguration` instance provided to the [methodname]`configure` method.
The configuration is applied during UI initialization, meaning that the configurator logic can access the current [classname]`VaadinRequest` and the user details, if a security infrastructure has been configured for the project and the user is logged into the application.
This allows to fine tune the observability to single user granularity.

> For example, the following implementation shows how to set up observability based on a mutable configuration tight to the current logged user.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, the following implementation shows how to set up observability based on a mutable configuration tied to the currently logged in user.
```

        var userSettings = fetchConfiguration(request.getUserPrincipal());
        if (userSettings != null && userSettings.isEnabled()) {
            config.setEnabled(true);
            config.setDocumentLoadEnabled(userSettings.isDocumentLoad());
            config.setUserInteractionEnabled(userSettings.isUserInteraction());
            config.setLongTaskEnabled(userSettings.isLongTask());
            config.setXMLHttpRequestEnabled(userSettings.isXmlHTTPRequest());
            config.setFrontendErrorEnabled(userSettings.isFrontendError());
        } else {
            config.setEnabled(false);
        }
    }

    // UserObservabilityConfig represent a simple DTO that carries user
    // related information used to tune ObservabilityClientConfiguration
    private UserObservabilityConfig fetchConfiguration(Principal user) {
        if (user != null) {
            // fetch the configuration for the given user from some storage
            // e.g. in-memory data structure, database table, properties file, ...
            return config;
        }
        // user not logged-in, return null or a default configuration
        return null;
    }

}
----

> With the above implementation, the configuration can for example be fetched from a database table, allowing changes to be applied at runtime after a browser page reload.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With the above implementation, the configuration can (for example) be fetched from a database table, allowing changes to be applied at runtime after a browser page reload.
```

Reviewer: I would rather use commas than parenthesis here.

> The configurator is loaded through the Java ServiceLoader API, adding to [filename]`src/main/resources/META-INF/services/` the file [filename]`com.vaadin.observability.ObservabilityClientConfigurer` with the content being the fully qualified name of the configurator class. For this example, the content would be `org.example.UserBasedFrontendObservability`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The configurator is loaded through the Java ServiceLoader API, by adding the file [filename]`com.vaadin.observability.ObservabilityClientConfigurer` to the [filename]`src/main/resources/META-INF/services/` directory, with the content being the fully qualified name of the configurator class.

For this example, the file looks like this:
`com.vaadin.observability.ObservabilityClientConfigurer`
[source]
----
`org.example.UserBasedFrontendObservability`
----
```

> For details on observability client settings, consult the Javadocs of [interfacename]`ObservabilityClientConfiguration` interface.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For details on observability client settings, consult the Javadocs of the [interfacename]`ObservabilityClientConfiguration` interface.
```

.Load the configurator in a Spring project
[NOTE]
====

> For Spring based project, the configurator can be loaded by exposing the implementation as a Spring managed [annotationname]`@Bean`, without the need to register the class for the ServiceLoader API.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For Spring based projects, the configurator can be loaded by exposing the implementation as a Spring managed [annotationname]`@Bean`, without the need to register the class for the ServiceLoader API.
```
